P8105 Final Project Proposal
================

## Analyses in Drug Overdose and Death Counts Across States

### Team members:

Jinghan Liu (jl6048); Paula Wu (pw2551); Yuxuan Chen (yc4018); Yuan Meng
(ym2866); Yijia Chen (yc3883)

### Motivation:

“Drug Overdose Deaths Remain High” - the headline posted by CDC rings
the bell. Deaths resulting from drug overdose increase drastically in
every state, especially in those who recently passed bills to
decriminalize recreational cannabis or marijuana. The abuse of and
addiction to drugs is a genuine national crisis that influences public
health as well as social and financial welfare. <br><br> Also, the
posted drug overdose death rate and rate change maps from CDC haven’t
been updated for the past 2-3 years. Thus, our group wants to start from
here and do more investigation upon the drug overdose death rate across
states in the US based on other data resources online to propel our
motivation even further.

### Intended Final Product

Apart from the required final products mentioned in the course website,
the content in our final product aims to help identify factors
associated with drug overdose mortality rate. Based on identified
factors, we could identify groups of people that are more vulnerable
when facing drug overdose.

### Anticipated Data Source

Main dataset: Provisional counts for drug overdose deaths within the 50
and the District of Columbia 2015-2021:
<https://data.cdc.gov/NCHS/VSRR-Provisional-Drug-Overdose-Death-Counts/xkb8-kh2a>
<br>Other helpful sources:
<https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/drug-overdose-data.htm>;
<https://www.drugabuse.gov/drug-topics/opioids/opioid-summaries-by-state>

### Planned Analyses

Questions to explore: How different types of drugs affect the death
rate? Drug usage in different states? What identities make people more
likely to be trapped into drug overdose in the U.S? What are the most
significant factors that contribute to a higher drug overdose rate /
death rate over times? <br> Techniques: basic data processing in R
studio, EDA, time-series analysis, and modeling.

### Visualizations

Map that allows users to view the fatality rate of overdose in various
states of the US. Mortality (rate) caused by each type of drug Types of
drug overdose by region Fatality rate in different years with different
types of drug Cause of death across different drug

### Coding challenges

Multi-dimensional data processing; Data tidying; Data mining;
Combination of different datasets

### Planned Timeline
